# Atmospheric Stability

The stability of the atmosphere can be described using the three
different conditions of equilibrium: stable, neutral, or unstable (Fig.
1). When a ball is displaced up either side of a valley, gravity will
work to bring the ball back to its starting point. This would be
described as a stable system. If the ball was on top of a ridge, any
displacement would cause the ball would move quickly away from its
initial point - this is defined as an unstable system. Finally, when a
ball is displaced and does not act to return to its original starting
position or move farther away from the original starting point, the
stability would be defined as neutral.

```{figure} ../../images/stability.jpg
:alt: Stability types - stable, unstable, neutral
:width: 300px
:align: center
:name: stability

Different conditions of equilibrium related to stability.
Image from the <a href="https://serc.carleton.edu/introgeo/models/EqStBOT.html" target="_blank">Equilibrium, Stability, and Behavior over time</a>
 and is licensed under the <a href=http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/>Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0</a>. Image source https://serc.carleton.edu/images/introgeo/models/Stability.jpg
```

These conditions can also be applied to the atmosphere. For parcels
initially displaced upwards, those wanting to rise without any forcing
would be *unstable*; those wanting to sink would be *stable*; those that
would need more forcing in order to rise freely would be *conditionally
unstable*; all others would be *neutral*. We will now apply these
equilibrium types to the atmosphere and use parcel theory to determine
the stability of the atmosphere.

## Parcel Theory
In meteorology, parcel theory is used to determine and describe the
stability of the Earth-atmosphere system. A parcel is a fictitious blob
of air that has similar moisture and temperature characteristics
throughout the parcel. Parcel sizes vary from the size of a large
playground ball to as big as a parking lot. To envision what parcels may
look like you could think of the bubbles in boiling water or the blobs
of wax that move up and down in lava lamps. The mechanisms in the
atmosphere are similar to both of those examples; a parcel of water or
wax is heated from below, just as the sun heats the atmosphere from
below.

Whether the atmosphere is stable, unstable, or conditionally unstable,
rising motion can occur and lead to the development of different types
of clouds. The development of clouds is predicated on the fact that
there is sufficient moisture to go along with the rising motion. In
stable layers with sufficient moisture and rising motion, sheet like
clouds will form (e.g., stratus, altostratus). In unstable or
conditionally unstable portions of the atmosphere with sufficient
moisture puffy clouds (e.g., cumulus, cumulonimbus) often form.

When air parcels rise, they always, and for all time will, *cool*.
Depending on the exact atmospheric conditions, the parcels will cool at
one of two lapse rates. If the air is not saturated (< 100% RH;
unsaturated) then rising parcels will cool at the Dry Adiabatic Lapse
Rate (DALR) of 9.8 $K$ $km^{-1}$. For parcels with 100% RH, if they continue
to rise, will cool at the Wet Adiabatic Lapse Rate (WALR), also known as
the Moist Adiabatic Lapse Rate (MALR). The WALR is not constant and
varies greatly over the temperature and pressure profile; consult a
skew-T/log-p diagram to confirm this fact.

## WALR vs. DALR
The WALR is actually not an adiabatic process. Adiabatic motions are
such that there is no net gain or loss of energy; the change in
temperature comes through the expansion (cooling) or compression
(warming) of parcels. If you continue to cool air that is already
saturated, according to the Clausius-Clayperon equation, less water
vapor can be present in cooler air, so it must be converted from water
vapor to liquid water or ice. This is one way in which clouds are
formed. So air parcels are still rising and cooling at the DALR, but
when the water vapor is converted to liquid water, latent energy is
released to the air parcel, which will slightly warm the parcel. This
results in a slightly lower cooling rate for a saturated parcel.
